I'm making this video because I
frequently see people who are interested
in Guild Wars 2 but they're really
bummed out that they can't play as a
dedicated healer and they just can't
seem to understand why this is such a
good thing is such an innovation for the
genre so I'm going to try and explain in
my own words why ArenaNet have made this
decision and why it will just make the
game so so much better for it
ok so first off let's be clear on what a
dedicated healer is and that would be a
class whose sole purpose is to provide
support for the team and keep them alive
and he can't do anything else everyone
in the team is dependent on this
dedicated healer if he makes a mistake
or if he dies everyone wipes and it's
game over now I can understand perfectly
why someone would want to play this type
of character people like to be the one
who everyone is relying on people who
like the feeling of helping their
friends and you must understand these
aren't things that you're going to miss
out on if you play Guild Wars 2 ArenaNet
fully understands why people play a
dedicated healer and those people are
still being catered for but there are
two pretty big problems with dedicated
healers and ArenaNet is just going ahead
and just trying to fix both of them at
once
so I'll talk you guys through both of
them the first problem is the way the
class plays and it's probably the one
that's easier to explain it's boring
guys sure it's fun to be the one who's
keeping everyone alive and helping your
friends but what are you actually doing
ninety percent of the time in combat
you're looking at a party window you're
watching health bars go up and down and
you're clicking on skills before they
get too low it's basically a game of
whack-a-mole now I'm not saying that
whack-a-mole isn't fun or addictive not
by a long shot but it is ridiculously
simplistic and when you've got a huge
beautiful in-game world with awesome
things to see and do reducing the entire
combat experience of one class down to
watching a party window is in my opinion
and probably quite a lot of people's a
bit of a slap in the face
so in Guild Wars 1 right you could go
out and explore the world with entirely
computer-controlled allies and people
found that when they played as a
dedicated healer with these
computer-controlled allies
it was boring as hell there was no
feeling of helping your friends and
being appreciated it was just mindlessly
clicking red bars for hours on end and
you got very little out of it so when
you take the rest of that stuff away
really you find what we've got is quite
a boring mechanic here at its core the
concept of just healing is boring so how
are they fixing it well there are two
key ways first in Guild Wars 2 there is
no such thing as a skill that targets an
ally so you will never find yourself
clicking on a party window to use a
skill
this makes the combat far more visual
and involving if you want to heal
something then you could for example
conjure a spring of water on the floor
that allies can walk into or you would
heal as a secondary effect from doing
damage but it's never through the party
window it's always ground targeting or
secondary effects secondly and more
importantly they have completely removed
the concept of a mere healer so healing
is really just one of the many ways that
you can provide support to your allies
you can try healing sure but what about
summoning an impenetrable dome that your
allies can enter but not your enemies or
how about providing buffs that let them
block blows or shrug off large hits of
damage rather than the focus being on
healing where you react to damage after
it has been done the focus is now on
protecting people from taking the damage
in the first place it's proactive it's
far less mindless and more fun you're
not a healer there's no such thing as a
healer in Guild Wars 2 you are a support
character so we can see how Guild Wars 2
is trying to make playing a supportive
character a lot more fun you know a lot
less like whack-a-mole but what about
the other problem of dedicated healers
now this problem isn't so much to do
with the way you personally play but
rather the way a dedicated class effects
everyone else simply if you have an
entire class dedicated to one role then
everyone else becomes dependent on it
let me explain why imagine a game where
everyone can keep themselves alive by
using their own defensive or healing
abilities and nothing else everything is
balanced around this idea so some
enemies will still be much more
difficult than others and you'll have to
depend on your
and good teamwork to beat them but
essentially everyone is keeping
themselves alive now imagine that
developers have added a dedicated
support class to the game and all it can
do is here we can't do anything else it
just provides support so why would
anyone want to use it they can get by
fine on their own and still do damage so
then the developers have to up the
damage of the monsters people then find
that they can't survive on their own
anymore and they need this dedicated
healer and become dependent on it a
dedicated class as you can see will
either be entirely useless or entirely
necessary so what's so wrong with having
people dependent on stuff well not
everything not by a longshot
giving people roles in combat can be
very fun and you'll certainly find that
in Guild Wars 2 but there are two pretty
big issues ArenaNet are addressing with
this whole dependency thing the first
issue is that this dependency causes a
lot of waiting around when you have a
single class everyone is dependent on
who will start having to wait for one
another to appear in order to play and
if this guy that you just found who's
playing a support character quit halfway
through the game you'll then have to go
back and try again it's not fun you're
not actually playing the game you're
being forced to stand around doing
nothing recent
MMOs have tried tackling this problem
with things like the dungeon finder but
really these are just temporary
solutions that don't fix the underlying
issue and there's another problem what
if you and your friends all want to play
together but none of you want to play a
specific role one of you is going to be
forced to switch and if you don't then
you're kicked and that is not fun either
so how are they fixing it in one major
way all classes can play all roles and
that's a that's pretty revolutionary as
far as a mmo's go each class still has
its own unique distinct style you still
have the beefy soldiers in the heavy
armor and the ranges with their pets and
you know the dark magic users and so on
but none are dedicated to one single
role they can all provide the damage and
they can all provide the support the
combat dependencies are still there
you're still working as a team each of
you having a task to complete
but that dynamically changes as the
battle goes on and there's no need to
play with anyone that you
want to play with or to wait around for
hours from this it might sound like all
of the classes will feel too similar to
play and that's understandable but you'd
be surprised how different it can be you
know a soldier might provide support by
standing in front of a friend with the
shield raised high and deflecting a
barrage of arrows that would have been
fatal a pet might intercept something
charging you from behind and undead bone
minions might form a fleshie defensive
wall around something and on and on and
on there's all kinds of different ways
that you can provide the support and
there really is a lot of variety
depending on which class you pick and of
course some classes are more support or
damage minded than others so they do all
feel very unique but there is simply no
such thing as a dedicated class
nothing is dedicated to one role nothing
is a pure healer
there is no dedicated healer hope that
clears things up